The time when the intellectual affairs of America could be conducted on
a monolingual basis is over. It has been irksome for long. The
intellectual life of London is dependent on people who understand the
French language about as well as their own. America's part in
contemporary culture is based chiefly upon two men familiar with Paris:
Whistler and Henry James. It is something in the nature of a national
disgrace that a New Zealand paper, "The Triad," should be more alert to,
and have better regular criticism of, contemporary French publications
than any American periodical has yet had.

I had wished to give but a brief anthology[1] of French poems,
interposing no comment of my own between author and reader; confining my
criticism to selection. But that plan was not feasible. I was indebted
to MM. Davray and Valette for cordial semi-permissions to quote the
"Mercure" publications.

Certain delicate wines will not travel; they are not always the best
wines. Foreign criticism may sometimes correct the criticism _du cru_. I
cannot pretend to give the reader a summary of contemporary French
opinion, but certain French poets have qualities strong enough to be
perceptible to me, that is, to at least one alien reader; certain things
are translatable from one language to another, a tale or an image will
"translate"; music will, practically, never translate; and if a work be
taken abroad in the original tongue, certain properties seem to become
less apparent, or less important. Fancy styles, questions of local
"taste," lose importance. Even though I know the overwhelming importance
of technique, technicalities in a foreign tongue cannot have for me the
importance they have to a man writing in that tongue; almost the only
technique perceptible to a foreigner is the presentation of content as
free as possible from the clutteration of dead technicalities, fustian a
la Louis XV; and from timidities of workmanship. This is perhaps the
only technique that ever matters, the only _mæstria_.

Mediocre poetry is, I think, the same everywhere; there is not the
slightest need to import it; we search foreign tongues for _mæstria_ and
for discoveries not yet revealed in the home product. The critic of a
foreign literature must know a reasonable amount of the bad poetry of
the nation he studies if he is to attain any sense of proportion.

He will never be as sensitive to fine shades of language as the native;
he has, however, a chance of being less bound, less allied to some group
of writers. It would be politic for me to praise as many living
French-men as possible, and thereby to increase the number of my chances
for congenial acquaintance on my next trip to Paris, and to have a large
number of current French books sent to me to review.

But these rather broad and general temptations can scarcely lead me to
praise one man instead of another.