God is glorified in the work of redemption in this, that there appears in
it so absolute and universal a dependence of the redeemed on him._

Here I propose to show, I., That there is an absolute and universal
dependence of the redeemed on God for all their good. And II., That God
hereby is exalted and glorified in the work of redemption.

I. There is an absolute and universal dependence of the redeemed on God.
The nature and contrivance of our redemption is such, that the redeemed
are in every thing directly, immediately and entirely dependent on God:
they are dependent on him for all, and are dependent on him every way.

The several ways wherein the dependence of one being may be upon another
for its good, and wherein the redeemed of Jesus Christ depend on God for
all their good, are these, viz., that they have all their good _of_ him,
and that they have all _through_ him, and that they have all _in_ him.
That he is the cause and original whence all their good comes, therein it
is _of_ him; and that he is the medium by which it is obtained and
conveyed, therein they have it _through_ him; and that he is that good
itself that is given and conveyed, therein it is _in_ him.

Now those that are redeemed by Jesus Christ do, in all these respects,
very directly and entirely depend on God for their all.

First, The redeemed have all their good _of_ God; God is the great author
of it; he is the first cause of it, and not only so, but he is the only
proper cause.

'Tis of God that we have our Redeemer: it is God that has provided a
Saviour for us. Jesus Christ is not only of God in his person, as he is
the only begotten Son of God, but he is from God, as we are concerned in
him and in his office of Mediator: he is the gift of God to us: God chose
and anointed him, appointed him his work, and sent him into the world.

And as it is God that gives, so 'tis God that accepts the Saviour. As it
is God that provides and gives the Redeemer to buy salvation for us, so it
is of God that salvation is bought: he gives the purchaser, and he affords
the thing purchased.

'Tis of God that Christ becomes ours, that we are brought to him and are
united to him: it is of God that we receive faith to close with him, that
we may have an interest in him. Eph. ii. 8, "For by grace ye are saved,
through faith; and that not of yourselves, it is the gift of God." 'Tis of
God that we actually do receive all the benefits that Christ has
purchased. 'Tis God that pardons and justifies, and delivers from going
down to hell, and it is his favor that the redeemed are received into, and
are made the objects of, when they are justified. So it is God that
delivers from the dominion of sin, and cleanses us from our filthiness,
and changes us from our deformity. It is of God that the redeemed do
receive all their true excellency, wisdom and holiness; and that two ways,
viz., as the Holy Ghost, by whom these things are immediately wrought, is
from God, proceeds from him and is sent by him; and also as the Holy
Ghost himself is God, by whose operation and indwelling the knowledge of
divine things, and a holy disposition, and all grace, are conferred and
upheld.