As "Filipinas dentro de Cien Anos", this article was originally
published serially in the Filipino fortnightly review "La Solidaridad",
of Madrid, running through the issues from September, 1889, to
January, 1890.

It supplements Rizal's great novel "Noli Me Tangere" and its sequel
"El Filibusterismo", and the translation here given is fortunately by
Mr. Charles Derbyshire who in his "The Social Cancer" and "The Reign
of Greed" has so happily rendered into English those masterpieces
of Rizal.

The reference which Doctor Rizal makes to President Harrison had in
mind the grandson-of-his-grandfather's blundering, wavering policy
that, because of a groundless fear of infringing the natives' natural
rights, put his country in the false light of wanting to share in
Samoa's exploitation, taking the leonine portion, too, along with
Germany and England.

Robert Louis Stevenson has told the story of the unhappy
condition created by that disastrous international agreement
which was achieved by the dissembling diplomats of greedy Europe
flattering unsophisticated America into believing that two monarchies
preponderating in an alliance with a republic would be fairer than
the republic acting unhampered.

In its day the scheme was acclaimed by irrational idealists as a
triumph of American abnegation and an example of modern altruism. It
resulted that "the international agreement" became a constant cause
of international disagreements, as any student of history could have
foretold, until, disgusted and disillusioned, the United States
tardily recalled Washington's warning against entanglements with
foreign powers and became a party to a real partition, but this time
playing the lamb's part. England was compensated with concessions
in other parts of the world, the United States was "given" what it
already held under a cession twenty-seven years old,--and Germany
took the rest as her emperor had planned from the start.

There is this Philippine bearing to the incident that the same stripe
of unpractical philanthropists, not discouraged at having forced
the Samoans under the ungentle German rule--for their victims and not
themselves suffer by their mistakes, are seeking now the neutralization
by international agreement of the Archipelago for which Rizal gave
his life. Their success would mean another "entangling alliance"
for the United States, with six allies, or nine including Holland,
China and Spain, if the "great republic" should be allowed by the
diplomats of the "Great Powers" to invite these nonentities in world
politics, with whom she would still be outvoted.
