But his intellect was active and rapid, rather than powerful, and in all
his writings we feel the want of a stronger electric current to give that
vigor of conception and felicity of expression, by which we distinguish
the undefinable something called genius; while his moral nature, though
refined and elevated, seems to have been subordinate to his intellectual
tendencies and social qualities, and to have had itself little
determining influence on his life.  His career was less exceptional than
his character: a youth marked by delicate health and studious tastes, a
short-lived and not very successful share in the management of the
_Athenæum_, a fever of sympathy with Spanish patriots, arrested before it
reached a dangerous crisis by an early love affair ending in marriage, a
fifteen months’ residence in the West Indies, eight months of curate’s
duty at Herstmonceux, relinquished on the ground of failing health, and
through his remaining years a succession of migrations to the South in
search of a friendly climate, with the occasional publication of an
“article,” a tale, or a poem in _Blackwood_ or elsewhere—this, on the
prosaic background of an easy competence, was what made up the outer
tissue of Sterling’s existence.  The impression of his intellectual power
on his personal friends seems to have been produced chiefly by the
eloquence and brilliancy of his conversation; but the mere reader of his
works and letters would augur from them neither the wit nor the _curiosa
felicitas_ of epithet and imagery, which would rank him with the men
whose sayings are thought worthy of perpetuation in books of table-talk
and “ana.”  The public, then, since it is content to do without
biographies of much more remarkable men, cannot be supposed to have felt
any pressing demand even for a single life of Sterling; still less, it
might be thought, when so distinguished a writer as Archdeacon Hare had
furnished this, could there be any need for another.  But, in opposition
to the majority of Mr. Carlyle’s critics, we agree with him that the
first life is properly the justification of the second.  Even among the
readers personally unacquainted with Sterling, those who sympathized with
his ultimate alienation from the Church, rather than with his transient
conformity, were likely to be dissatisfied with the entirely apologetic
tone of Hare’s life, which, indeed, is confessedly an incomplete
presentation of Sterling’s mental course after his opinions diverged from
those of his clerical biographer; while those attached friends (and
Sterling possessed the happy magic that secures many such) who knew him
best during this latter part of his career, would naturally be pained to
have it represented, though only by implication, as a sort of deepening
declension ending in a virtual retraction.  Of such friends Carlyle was
the most eminent, and perhaps the most highly valued, and, as co-trustee
with Archdeacon Hare of Sterling’s literary character and writings, he
felt a kind of responsibility that no mistaken idea of his departed
friend should remain before the world without correction.  Evidently,
however, his “Life of Sterling” was not so much the conscientious
discharge of a trust as a labor of love, and to this is owing its strong
charm.  Carlyle here shows us his “sunny side.”  We no longer see him
breathing out threatenings and slaughter as in the Latter-Day Pamphlets,
but moving among the charities and amenities of life, loving and
beloved—a Teufelsdröckh still, but humanized by a Blumine worthy of him.
We have often wished that genius would incline itself more frequently to
the task of the biographer—that when some great or good personage dies,
instead of the dreary three or five volumed compilations of letter, and
diary, and detail, little to the purpose, which two thirds of the reading
public have not the chance, nor the other third the inclination, to read,
we could have a real “Life,” setting forth briefly and vividly the man’s
inward and outward struggles, aims, and achievements, so as to make clear
the meaning which his experience has for his fellows.  A few such lives
(chiefly, indeed, autobiographies) the world possesses, and they have,
perhaps, been more influential on the formation of character than any
other kind of reading.  But the conditions required for the perfection of
life writing—personal intimacy, a loving and poetic nature which sees the
beauty and the depth of familiar things, and the artistic power which
seizes characteristic points and renders them with lifelike effect—are
seldom found in combination.  “The Life of Sterling” is an instance of
this rare conjunction.  Its comparatively tame scenes and incidents
gather picturesqueness and interest under the rich lights of Carlyle’s
mind.  We are told neither too little nor too much; the facts noted, the
letters selected, are all such as serve to give the liveliest conception
of what Sterling was and what he did; and though the book speaks much of
other persons, this collateral matter is all a kind of scene-painting,
and is accessory to the main purpose.  The portrait of Coleridge, for
example, is precisely adapted to bring before us the intellectual region
in which Sterling lived for some time before entering the Church. 