Regent’s Park has had but a transitory day of fashion, and history has
not crowded it with associations like the other Royal Parks. It is the
largest and one of the most beautiful, yet there is something cold and
less attractive about it. In spring, with its wealth of thorn trees, it
has a delightfully rural appearance, and it possesses many charms on
close acquaintance. Its history as a Royal Park is as ancient as that
of Hyde Park or St. James’s, but it remained a distant country sporting
estate, and only assumed the form of a Park, in the modern sense of the
word, less than a hundred years ago.

In the dim distance of Domesday it formed part of the manor of
Tybourne. Later on the manor became Marylebone or Mary le Bourne, the
Church of St. Mary by the Burn, the brook in question being the Tyburn.
The manor in Domesday is described as part of the lands belonging to
the Abbey of Barking in Essex. In the thirteenth century it was held
by Robert de Vere, and passed by descent through his daughter to the
Earls of Arundel. Later on the manor was divided, and a fourth share
came to Henry V. as heir to the Earls of Derby. The greater part of the
manor was bought by Thomas Hobson, and his son, who was Lord Mayor in
1544, exchanged it with Henry VIII. for some church lands elsewhere.
So it became part of the royal hunting-ground, and the same enactment
concerning the preservation of game applied to Marylebone Park,
situated within the manor, as to Hyde Park. Queen Elizabeth leased part
of the manor to a certain Edward Forset, and James I. sold him all the
manor except the part known as Marylebone Park, now Regent’s Park. It
was again sold by the grandson of Edward Forset to John Holles, Duke
of Newcastle, and passed to his daughter, who married Edward Harley,
Earl of Oxford, and through their daughter, who married the second
Earl of Portland, to the Bentinck family. The Park has always remained
Crown property, although it has frequently been let by the reigning
sovereign. Charles I. granted it to Sir G. Strode and J. Wandesford as
a payment of a debt of £2318 for arms and ammunition. It was sold by
Cromwell with all the other royal lands, but after the Restoration it
went back to its former holders till the debt was discharged, and after
that to various other tenants. It was on the expiration of a lease to
the Duke of Portland in 1811 that the laying out of the Park in its
present form commenced.

During the early period incidents connected with it are meagre. It is
for the most part only in royal accounts that references to Marylebone
Park are found, and they are merely a bare statement of facts. But
that hunting-parties, with all the show and splendour attending them,
took place frequently, is certain. Among the Loseley MSS. occur, in
1554, instructions to Sir Thomas Cawarden, as “Master of the Tents
and Toiles,” to superintend the making of “certaine banquiting houses
of Bowes [= boughs] and other devices of pleasure.” One of these was
made in “Marybone Parke,” and a minute description is given. It was
40 feet long, and “wrought by tymber, brick, and lyme, with their
raunges and other necessary utensyles therto insident, and to the like
accustomed.” Also three “standinges” were made at the same time, “all
of tymber garnished with boughes and flowers, every [one] of them
conteynenge in length 10 foote and in bredth 8 foote, which houses and
standings were so edified, repaired, garnished, decked, and fynyshed
against the Marshall Saint Andrewes comynge thethere by speciale and
straight comandement, as well of the late King as his counsell to
Sir Tho Cawarden, Knt. M of the said Office of Revels; and
Lawrence Bradshaw, Surveior of the King’s works, exhibited for the
same earnest charge done, wrought and attended between the 27th
of June and the 2 of August in the said year” [4th of Edward VI.].
Employed on the above works for 22 days at all hours, a space to eat
and drink excepted, “Carpenters, bricklayers, 1d. the hour; labourers,
½d. p. hour; plasterers, 11d. a day; painters, 7d. and 6d. a day.”
“Charges for cutting boughs in the wood at Hyde Park for trimming the
banquetting house, gathering rushes, flags, and ivy; painters, taylors
for sewing roof, etc., basket makers working upon windows, total cost,
£169, 7s. 8d.” Only about half of this total was due to the work in
Marylebone, as a similar pavilion, and three other “standings,” were
made in Hyde Park at the same time.
