That picturesque type known as the American trapper ushered in the
opening event of Sierra Nevada history. True, the Spaniards of the
previous century had viewed the “snowy range of mountains,” had applied
the name Sierra Nevada, and even had visited its western base. But
penetration of the wild and snowy fastness awaited the coming of
Americans.

In the opening decades of the nineteenth century the entire American
West was occupied by scattered bands of trappers. From the ranks of the
“Fur Brigade” came Jedediah Strong Smith, a youthful fur trader, not yet
thirty years old but experienced in his profession and well educated for
his time. In the summer of 1826 he took his place at the head of a party
of men organized to explore the unknown region lying between Great Salt
Lake and the California coast. Smith’s leadership of this party gave him
a first place in the history of the Sierra Nevada. His party left the
Salt Lake rendezvous on August 22, 1826. A southwest course was followed
across the deserts of Utah and Nevada, penetrating the Mojave country
and the Cajon Pass. On November 27 they went into camp near Mission San
Gabriel. Smith was thus the first American to make the transcontinental
journey to California, the harbinger of a great overland human flood.

The Spanish governor of California refused to permit the party to travel
north as Smith had planned. Instead, he instructed that they should quit
California by the route used in entering. Reinforced with food,
clothing, and horses supplied by the friendly Mission San Gabriel, Smith
returned to the neighborhood of the Cajon Pass. It was not his
intention, however, to be easily deterred in his plan to explore
California. He followed the Sierra Madre to the junction of the Coast
Ranges and the Sierra Nevada and entered the San Joaquin Valley.

He found the great interior valley inhabited by large numbers of
Indians, who were in no way hostile or dangerous. There were “few beaver
and elk, deer and antelope in abundance.” Reaching one of the streams
flowing from the mountains, he determined to cross the Sierra Nevada and
return to Great Salt Lake. Smith called this stream the Wimmelche after
a tribe of Indians by that name who inhabited the region thereabouts. C.
Hart Merriam has established the fact that Smith’s “Wimmelche” is the
Kings River, and the time of his arrival there as February of 1827.
Since the passes of the Sierra in this region are never open before the
advent of summer, it is not surprising that his party failed in this
attempted crossing of the range. Authorities have differed in their
interpretation of Smith’s writing regarding his ultimate success in
traversing the Sierra, but there is little doubt that he crossed north
of the Yosemite region, perhaps as far north as the American River.
