Extravagance is the inevitable corollary to cheap living. The
expression “living” is used in its very broadest sense, and is by
no means confined to the mere consumption of foodstuffs. If living
be cheap the thousand and one attributes complementary thereto,
from wearing apparel to creature comforts for the home and from raw
materials to finished goods, must necessarily rule low in price. Under
such conditions the very fact that it is cheaper, as well as easier and
simpler, to incur a further capital charge, rather than to endeavour to
induce additional service from what is already in hand, though possibly
damaged slightly, prompts waste, in precisely the same way as it is
more expedient to replace the damaged part of a standardized article,
whether it be a motor-car, sewing machine, typewriter, or watch, than
to attempt to carry out a repair.

The ready availability of a spare part directly encourages waste more
or less. The convenience is provided at an attractive figure to appeal
to the consumer, while to the producer it renders a higher proportion
of profit than is attainable when it forms part and parcel of the
complete finished article. The latter is not marketed at the aggregate
of the prices of the integral parts, as one may promptly verify if they
feel so disposed. From this it must not be imagined that replacement
_per se_ is to be condemned, except that it is often attended by the
complete loss of the displaced and damaged part. Were the conservation
of the removed part conducted the system would be deserving of
whole-hearted support, because in this way the material of which it is
wrought would be available for further use. Those firms which insist
upon the return of a damaged section before they undertake to forward
the replacement are pursuing a wise policy. It is true they consign the
faulty or worn part to the junk pile, but, at intervals, the latter
is turned over to the manufacturing interests to undergo further
exploitation.

It is also somewhat significant to record that improvidence is
intimately associated with cheap labour. Cheap living and cheap
labour go hand-in-hand. As a matter of fact, until recently the
average working members of the community, from the comparative point
of view, have been guilty of greater improvidence than those who are
well-blessed with this world’s goods.