Someone has called National Parks and Monuments “The Crown Jewels of
America.” A part of their beauty and irreplaceable value is because the
approximately 180 units of the National Park System which extends from
Florida to Alaska and from Hawaii to Maine, are and have been wildflower
sanctuaries. Not only do native plants live under natural conditions,
but they are protected from picking, from grazing of domestic livestock,
and from the competition of exotic species, and from other activities of
mankind that would disrupt their normal habitat or disturb their native
way of life.

Men in the uniform of the National Park Service feel complimented
whenever visitors show an interest in the natural features of the areas
they protect, and are happy to assist them in locating rare species or
especially beautiful or spectacular specimens. Range and grazing
specialists are more and more using the natural vegetation of National
Parks and Monuments as “check plots” to aid them in studying ways and
means of preserving the level of grazing value on the open ranges.

Within the desert areas of the Southwest there are a number of National
Parks and Monuments. Three Monuments (Joshua Tree in California, Organ
Pipe Cactus and Saguaro in Arizona) have been created primarily to save
from exploitation and destruction outstanding areas of typical desert
vegetation. Although the others have been established to protect and
preserve geologic, historic, or archeologic values of national
significance, they are all wildflower sanctuaries. In California, Death
Valley National Monument is outstanding in its variety of desert
flowers. Lake Mead National Recreation Area, of which Hoover Dam is the
center, has exceptional displays of various forms of desert plants. A
great variety of desert vegetation will be shown and, if desired,
explained to the interested visitor, by National Park Service rangers at
Chiricahua, Tonto, Montezuma Castle, Casa Grande, and Tumacacori
National Monuments in Arizona. Of course the really great displays of
desert botany and ecology are featured at Organ Pipe Cactus and Saguaro
National Monuments.

In New Mexico, Chihuahuan Desert vegetation is particularly abundant at
Carlsbad Caverns National Park. A number of desert forms, especially
interesting because of the effect upon them of the ever-moving gypsum
dunes, are found at White Sands National Monument, near Alamogordo.
Another outstanding Chihuahuan Desert wildflower sanctuary is Big Bend
National Park in southwestern Texas.

Photography is encouraged in all of the National Parks and Monuments. By
asking a ranger, you will be able to learn where the various flower
displays may be found, the best time of day to obtain good results, and
other suggestions helpful in obtaining photographs of desert wildflowers
at their very best.

Each year the following magazine and radio program present bulletins on
moisture and other pertinent conditions in the desert, spotlight areas
in which outstanding wildflower displays are developing, and advance
suggestions relative to areas in which spectacular displays may be
expected.