A tree is generally defined as a woody plant having one well-defined
stem and a more or less definitely formed crown, usually attaining a
height of at least eight feet. Using water and minerals from the soil,
gases from the air and energy from the sun, a tree manufactures the food
it needs for growth and reproduction. Trees, like man, grow rapidly when
they are young but gradually their growth decreases; they begin to
deteriorate and eventually die. Nature then reduces them to the elements
from which they were derived.

The terms “hardwood,” “softwood,” “deciduous” and “non-deciduous” are
often encountered in tree literature. These terms are confusing and
often misleading. Needle-bearing or cone-bearing trees are designated as
softwoods even though the wood may be dense. Hardwoods are the
broad-leaved (unlike needles or scales) trees, the wood of which may be
dense or soft.

The conifers, or softwoods, generally retain their leaves more than one
growing season and produce seed in cones; however, there are exceptions.
Baldcypress, a conifer, is deciduous since it sheds its leaves in
autumn. Cedar and juniper produce berry-like cones that scarcely
resemble cones.

The hardwoods, or broad-leaved trees, are generally deciduous; i.e.,
they shed their leaves in autumn. Texas has many exceptions, for
example: southern magnolia, live oak and American holly which retain
green leaves through the winter.

More than half of the 1,100 species of native trees in the United States
are found in the South. Of these, more than 200 species and varieties
are native to Texas. In addition, many exotic species have been
introduced and now grow in many parts of the state.

The four main forest regions of Texas include: the Southern pine forest
in East Texas; the central hardwoods, the post oak and cross timbers of
North-central Texas; the semi-tropical forest in the Rio Grande Valley
region of Texas; and the mountain forest, the timbered areas of West
Texas which are a continuation of the timber types of the Southern Rocky
Mountains. In Texas, trees are the principal vegetative cover on an
estimated area of 28,805,617 acres.