The question has frequently been asked why twice as many male as female
weasels are captured. This is the proportion in research collections,
as may be seen from table no. 2, and I am convinced that the specimens
in these collections are saved in approximately the same proportion as
that in which they are caught. Although it might be assumed, upon first
consideration, that there are twice as many males as females in nature,
selective factors enter into the catch. For example, because a male
weasel is approximately twice as heavy as a female, it may be necessary
for him, in a given length of time, to travel twice as far as the
female to obtain the required amount of food with the result that a
given number of traps or snares will catch twice as many males as
females. Indeed, Glover (1943B:8) shows that, on the average, in
_Mustela frenata noveboracensis_ in Pennsylvania, the male actually
does travel slightly more than twice as far as the female (704 feet
versus 346 feet). From table no. 2, it may be seen that in most winter
months the ratio is 3 males to one female. This ratio is reasonable
enough, in view of what has been said, if it is considered also that
the lighter weight of the female permits her safely to step on the pans
of traps that would be sprung by heavier males.

If in the breeding season, which is April through August in _M.
frenata_, the female is passive and if the male is restlessly searching
for her, he may thus increase still more his chances of being caught in
traps set for weasels.

My own studies of live weasels in nature indicate that in the season
when females are attending young which are half grown, or larger, the
adult male weasels live singly in dens of their own, separate and apart
from the females and their young (Hamilton, 1933:328, records adult
males living with the female and her young, but possibly this was when
the young were less than half grown). Perhaps these males at that time
travel no farther than is necessary to obtain food for themselves.
Females, at this time, forage not only to meet their own needs, but for
food to supply their young as well. At this time, in May and June, as
may be seen from table no. 2, almost as many adult females as adult
males _are_ caught. The reason why only relatively more females than in
other months, instead of actually more females than males, are caught
at this time probably is that the adult males also are extraordinarily
active at this time because they are in breeding condition. Perhaps
the explanation in part is to be found in the lesser weight of the
female (approximately half of the male's weight) which, as indicated
above, permits her to step on the pan of a steel trap without springing
it whereas the heavier male does spring the trap and as a consequence
is caught. Hamilton (1933:299-300), who mentions this selective factor,
found an equal number of males and females in the three newly born
litters that came under his observation.