Variability—Individual differences—Doubtful species—Wide ranging, much
diffused, and common species, vary most—Species of the larger genera in
each country vary more frequently than the species of the smaller
genera—Many of the species of the larger genera resemble varieties in
being very closely, but unequally, related to each other, and in having
restricted ranges.


Before applying the principles arrived at in the last chapter to
organic beings in a state of nature, we must briefly discuss whether
these latter are subject to any variation. To treat this subject
properly, a long catalogue of dry facts ought to be given; but these I
shall reserve for a future work. Nor shall I here discuss the various
definitions which have been given of the term species. No one
definition has satisfied all naturalists; yet every naturalist knows
vaguely what he means when he speaks of a species. Generally the term
includes the unknown element of a distinct act of creation. The term
“variety” is almost equally difficult to define; but here community of
descent is almost universally implied, though it can rarely be proved.
We have also what are called monstrosities; but they graduate into
varieties. By a monstrosity I presume is meant some considerable
deviation of structure, generally injurious, or not useful to the
species. Some authors use the term “variation” in a technical sense, as
implying a modification directly due to the physical conditions of
life; and “variations” in this sense are supposed not to be inherited;
but who can say that the dwarfed condition of shells in the brackish
waters of the Baltic, or dwarfed plants on Alpine summits, or the
thicker fur of an animal from far northwards, would not in some cases
be inherited for at least a few generations? And in this case I presume
that the form would be called a variety.

It may be doubted whether sudden and considerable deviations of
structure, such as we occasionally see in our domestic productions,
more especially with plants, are ever permanently propagated in a state
of nature. Almost every part of every organic being is so beautifully
related to its complex conditions of life that it seems as improbable
that any part should have been suddenly produced perfect, as that a
complex machine should have been invented by man in a perfect state.
Under domestication monstrosities sometimes occur which resemble normal
structures in widely different animals. Thus pigs have occasionally
been born with a sort of proboscis, and if any wild species of the same
genus had naturally possessed a proboscis, it might have been argued
that this had appeared as a monstrosity; but I have as yet failed to
find, after diligent search, cases of monstrosities resembling normal
structures in nearly allied forms, and these alone bear on the
question. If monstrous forms of this kind ever do appear in a state of
nature and are capable of reproduction (which is not always the case),
as they occur rarely and singly, their preservation would depend on
unusually favourable circumstances. They would, also, during the first
and succeeding generations cross with the ordinary form, and thus their
abnormal character would almost inevitably be lost. But I shall have to
return in a future chapter to the preservation and perpetuation of
single or occasional variations.