Classification of Fish—Their Form and Colour—Mode and Means of
 Life—Curiously-shaped Fish—Senses of Smell and Hearing in Fish—Fish
 nearly Insensible to Pain—The Fecundity of Fish—Sexual Instinct of
 Fish—External Impregnation of the Ova—Ripening of a Salmon Egg—Birth
 of a Herring—Proposal for a Marine Observatory in order to note
 the Growth of our Sea Fish—Curious Stories about the Growth of the
 Eel—All that is known about the Mackerel—Whitebait: is it a Distinct
 Species?—Mysterious Fish: the Vendace and the Powan—Where are the
 Haddocks?—The Food of Fish—Fish as a rule not Migratory—The Growth of
 Fish Shoals—When Fish are good for Food—The Balancing Power of Nature.


Fish form the fourth class of vertebrate animals, and, as a general
rule, they live in the water; although in Ceylon and India there are
found species that live in the earth, or, at any rate, that are able to
exist in mud, not to speak of some that are said to occupy the trees
of those countries! The classification of fishes as given by Cuvier
is usually adopted. That eminent naturalist has divided these animals
into those with true bones, and those having a cartilaginous structure;
and the former again are divided into acanthopterous and malcopterous
fish. Other naturalists have adopted more elaborate classifications;
but Cuvier’s being the simplest has in my opinion a strong claim to be
considered the best; at least it is the one generally used.

A fish breathes by means of its gills, and progresses chiefly by
means of its tail. This animal is admirably adapted for progressing
through the water, as may be seen from its form, which has been
imitated more or less closely by the builders of ships, the makers
of weavers’ shuttles, and others. Fish are exceedingly beautiful as
regards both form and colour. There are comparatively few persons,
however, who have an opportunity of seeing them at the moment of
their greatest brilliancy, namely, just when they are brought out of
the water. I allude more particularly to some of our sea fish—as the
herring, mackerel, etc. The power of a fish to take on the colour of
its hiding-place may be mentioned. I found, a few weeks ago, some young
fish of various kinds in the Tweed at Stobo, which were, when in the
water, quite undistinguishable from the vegetable matter among which
they were taking shelter. It is not an easy matter to paint a fish so
as accurately to transmit to canvas its exquisite shape and glowing
colours. The moment it is taken from its own element its form alters
and its delicate hues fade; and in different localities fish have,
like the chameleon, different colours, so that the artist must have a
quick eye and a responding hand to catch the rapidly-fleeting tints of
the animal. Nothing, for instance, can reveal more beautiful masses of
colour than the hauling into the boat of a drift of herring-nets. As
breadth after breadth emerges from the water the magnificent ensemble
of the fish flashes with ever-changing hues upon the eye—a wondrous
pantomimic mixture of glancing blue and gold, and silver and purple,
blended into one great burning glow of harmonious colour, lighted
into brilliant life by the soft rays of the newly-risen sun. But,
alas for the painter! unless he can instantaneously fix the burnished
mass on his canvas, the light of its colour will be extinguished, and
its beauty be dimmed, long before the boat has reached the harbour.
The brightly-coloured fish of the tropics are indeed gorgeous, as is
the plumage of tropical birds; but as regards excellence of flavour,
beautifully-blended colours, and especially as a food power, they
cannot for a moment be compared with that plentiful poor man’s
fish—the beautiful common herring of our British waters.