On February 20 in Prater Canyon Ranger Markley noticed that prairie dogs
were active although about three feet of snow lay on the ground. Between
April 15 and May 15 approximately 500 prairie dogs were in Prater Canyon
above Lower Well; through field glasses 350 were counted. Young were
first noted in Prater Canyon on July 12. Quaintance and Lloyd White had
under observation two bulky nests of the red-tailed hawk in the tops of
tall Douglas firs in side draws of Prater Canyon. Quaintance found near
the rimrock a quarter of a mile from the prairie-dog town the skeletons
of two prairie dogs between a sliver of a dead pinyon branch and the
branch itself. Another skeleton lay on a dead limb fifteen feet from the
ground. A red-tailed hawk once was observed to swoop down, seize a
prairie dog and fly down the canyon. The four colonies found in the Park
were in Prater Canyon, in Morfield Canyon, in the east fork of School
Section Canyon, and in Whites Canyon. The last two were smaller colonies
than the first two.

Prairie dogs were observed away from these colonies. On June 20 a young
prairie dog ran into a culvert on the Knife Edge Section of the road.
Others were observed on the north side of the road, at the head of the
east prong of School Section Canyon, on the road west of Park Point, and
on the road at the head of Long Canyon five miles from the nearest known
colony in the Park. Possibly this last individual came from the
Montezuma Valley north of the Park. Mr. Prater, after whom Prater Canyon
is named, homesteaded on the Mesa Verde in 1899. He informed Quaintance
that prairie dogs were present in Morfield Canyon prior to 1900 but were
not in Prater Canyon in 1899. Prater said he drowned out a few that came
into Prater Canyon before 1914. In 1942, Chief Ranger Faha wrote in his
Annual Animal Census Report that he had interviewed an old time resident
(name not noted) who stated that prairie dogs were not present on the
Mesa Verde until about 1905 or 1906 and that Helen Morfield, the
daughter of Judge Morfield who homesteaded in Morfield Canyon, brought
the first prairie dogs on the Mesa Verde. Estimates of the prairie-dog
population in the Annual Animal Census Reports for 1935 through 1941
were: 1935--800, 1936--650, 1937--650, 1938--650, 1939--no report,
1940--1500 and increasing, 1941--slight decrease. After 1942 more
adequate records were kept by Chief Ranger Wade and other Park Service
personnel.

On August 9, 1943, occupied burrows of prairie dogs were found to be
thinly scattered down Prater Canyon from the head of the canyon at the
Maintenance Camp to a point about one hundred feet below the lower well.
The largest concentration was in the vicinity of the upper well near
Prater's Cabin. Little new digging that would indicate a spreading
population was noticed. Seemingly desirable, but unoccupied, habitat
extended at least two miles south of the inhabited area. In Morfield
Canyon, burrows were found from a point one hundred yards north of the
fence at the south boundary of Section 17, south for a mile and one-half
to a point one-third of a mile into Section 29. The greatest
concentration was in the vicinity of Morfield Well. South of this point
the burrows were found only along the narrow dry sides of the canyon and
in sage-covered areas at slightly higher elevations than the rest of the
floor of the canyon. Seemingly desirable habitat extended at least three
miles to the south and one mile to the north of the occupied area. The
report of the study in 1943 concluded with the statement that artificial
control by poisoning would be unwise and unnecessary. Requests were
being made at that time to exterminate prairie dogs in the Park on the
basis of the unproved assumption that prairie dogs move from the Park to
surrounding range land where extermination was then being attempted by
poisoning.
