When we inquire among which early peoples we are likely to find the
first cultivation of astronomy, whatever the form it may have taken,
we learn that it is generally agreed by archæologists that the first
civilisations which have so far been traced were those in the Nile
Valley and in the adjacent countries in Western Asia.

The information which we possess concerning these countries has been
obtained from the remains of their cities, of their temples--even, in
the case of Babylonia, of their observatories and of the records of
their observations. Of history on papyrus we have relatively little.

Not so early as these, but of an antiquity which is still undefined,
are two other civilisations with which we became familiar before the
treasure-houses of Egypt and Babylonia were open to our inquiries.
These civilisations occupied the regions now called India and China.

The circumstances of these two groups are vastly dissimilar so far
as the actual sources of information are concerned; for in relation
to China and India we have paper records, but, alas! no monuments of
undoubtedly high antiquity. It is true that there are many temples in
India in the present day, but, on the authority of Prof. Max Müller,
they are relatively modern.

The contrary happens in Egypt, for there monuments exist more ancient
than any of the inscribed records; monuments indicating a more or less
settled civilisation; a knowledge of astronomy, and temples erected on
astronomical principles for the purposes of worship, the astronomers
being called "the mystery teachers of Heaven."

We go back in Egypt for a period, as estimated by various authors, of
something like 6,000 or 7,000 years. In Babylonia inscribed tablets
carry us into the dim past for a period of certainly 5,000 years; but
the so-called "omen" tablets indicate that observations of eclipses and
other astronomical phenomena had been made for some thousands of years
before this period. In China and in India we go back as certainly to
more than 4,000 years ago.

When one comes to examine the texts, whether written on paper or
papyrus, burnt in brick, or cut on stone, which archæologists have
obtained from all these sources, we at once realise that man's earliest
observations of the heavenly bodies in all the regions we have named
may very fairly be divided into three perfectly distinct stages. I do
not mean to say that these stages follow each other exactly, but that
at one period one stage was more developed than another, and so on.

For instance, in the first stage, wonder and worship were the prevalent
features; in the second, there was the need of applying the observation
of celestial phenomena in two directions, one the direction of
utility--such as the formation of a calendar and the foundation of
years and months; and the other the astrological direction.

Supplied as we moderns are with the results of astronomical observation
in the shape of almanacs, pocket-books, and the like, it is always
difficult, and for most people quite impossible, to put ourselves
in the place and realise the conditions of a race emerging into
civilisation, and having to face the needs of the struggle for
existence in a community which, in the nature of the case, must have
been agricultural. Those would best succeed who best knew when "to plow
and sow, and reap and mow;" and the only means of knowledge was at
first the observation of the heavenly bodies. It was this, and not the
accident of the possession of an extended plain, which drove early man
to be astronomically minded.