In thinking of an unknown place it is inevitable that some image
should rise in the mind and recur until it is finally shattered
by the revelation of its almost total falsity which a visit to
that country brings about. My own imaginings, based on what I had
seen in passing through the Red Sea on my way to Zanzibar, were
fantastically unreal. I saw blue mountain tops like jagged teeth
appearing over the horizon at sunset, and combining these with
what I had seen of the reefs and islands of the Gulf of Suez and
Bab-el-Mandeb, it came as a shock, some years later, to find that
the essential of life on the coast is the great maritime plain,
the mountains remaining in the distance, still inaccessible for me.

My first actual sight of the country was typical of the cloudy
weather which sometimes occurs in winter. Our little steamer was
entering the great gap in the barrier reefs five miles out to sea,
directly opposite to what is now the harbour of Port Sudan. Then it
was only “Mersa Shêkh Barûd[1],” a saint’s tomb forming the
only work of man for many miles. Grey sea and sky, blue mountains,
faintly visible beyond the great dull plain, greeted me; later,
the little tomb, built on a knoll of yellow coral rock at the
entrance of the inlet, a mark for sailors, gleamed white out of
all this greyness. Coming nearer still, one saw that the shore is
composed of a low level line of yellowish cliffs, about six feet
high, undermined below by the constant wash of the waves and sloping
inwards at their summits. The shore is separated from the blue-black
water by a broad band of green shallows, its outer edge defined by a
thin white line of breakers. This is the edge of the fringing reef,
which is practically uniform and continuous through the length of
both shores of the Red Sea. We were sailing in a channel of fairly
deep water partially protected from the waves of the open sea by
the barrier reefs. These are a series of shoals and surface reefs,
extending parallel to the shore, at a distance of one to five miles
out to sea.

This, my first view of the country, may be taken as typical of the
whole coast, variations in its uniformity being few. The weather
that day was rather exceptional, for often in winter there is all
the incomparable sparkle of sunshine and crisp breeze of Egypt,
and the mountains, in this wonderful air, come nearer. There are
days when I have seen distinctly all the light and shade of their
precipices 80 miles away. I leave to your imagination the clearness,
almost brilliance, of the great mountains seen at only 15 miles on
such days as these. Even so they do not lose their dignity of form
and distance, while revealing their vast precipices and terrible
ravines, all bare rock, no vegetation, or even soil, to soften their
outlines. Truly they are a “great and terrible wilderness.” So
too is the plain, vast and uniform, all open to the sky—neither
the few acacia bushes[2], nor the sparse tufts of apparently dead and
almost woody grass serving to render it soft and pleasant to the eye,
nor to cover its grey sand and gravel from scorching in the rays
of the sun. Great and terrible, a naked savage land, every feature
typifying thirst and starvation, so it became to me during my first
visit. I was glad indeed to leave, half hoping I should never return.