There were three of us—Mary, Eliza, and myself. I was approaching
fifteen, Mary was about a year younger, and Eliza between twelve and
thirteen years of age. Mamma treated us all as children, and was blind
to the fact that I was no longer what I had been. Although not tall for
my age, nor outwardly presenting a manly appearance, my passions were
awakening, and the distinctive feature of my sex, although in repose it
looked magnificent enough, was very sufficiently developed when under
the influence of feminine excitement.

As yet, I had absolutely no knowledge of the uses of the different
organs of sex. My sisters and I all slept in the same room. They
together in one bed, I alone in another. When no one was present, we had
often mutually examined the different formations of our sexes.

We had discovered that mutual handlings gave a certain amount of
pleasing sensation; and, latterly, my eldest sister had discovered that
the hooding and unhooding of my doodle, as she called it, instantly
caused it to swell up and stiffen as hard as a piece of wood. My feeling
of her little pinky slit gave rise in her to nice sensations, but on the
slightest attempt to insert even my finger, the pain was too great. We
had made so little progress in the _attouchements_ that not the
slightest inkling of what could be done in that way dawned upon us. I
had begun to develop a slight growth of moss-like curls round the root
of my cock; and then, to our surprise, Mary began to show a similar
tendency. As yet, Eliza was as bald as her hand, but both were prettily
formed, with wonderfully full and fat mounts of Venus. We were perfectly
innocent of guile and quite habituated to let each other look at all our
naked bodies without the slightest hesitation; and when playing in the
garden, if one wanted to relieve the pressure on the bladder, we all
squatted down together, and crossed waters, each trying who could piddle
fastest. Notwithstanding these symptoms of passion when excited, in a
state of calm I might have passed for a boy of ten or eleven.

My father had left us but moderately provided for, and mamma, wishing to
live comfortably, preferred giving me lessons along with my sisters at
home to sending me to school; but her health beginning to fail, she
inserted an advertisement in the _Times_ for a governess. Out of a large
number of applicants, a young lady, of the name of Evelyn, was selected.
Some ten days afterwards she arrived, and became one of the family.
