A spacious, handsome, and tastefully furnished drawing room,
decorated in dark colours.In the back, a wide doorway with
curtains drawn back, leading into a smaller room decorated
in the same style as the drawing-room.In the right-hand
wall of the front room, a folding door leading out to the
hall.In the opposite wall, on the left, a glass door, also
with curtains drawn back.Through the panes can be seen
part of a verandah outside, and trees covered with autumn
foliage.An oval table, with a cover on it, and surrounded
by chairs, stands well forward.In front, by the wall on
the right, a wide stove of dark porcelain, a high-backed
arm-chair, a cushioned foot-rest, and two footstools.A
settee, with a small round table in front of it, fills the
upper right-hand corner.In front, on the left, a little
way from the wall, a sofa.Further back than the glass
door, a piano.On either side of the doorway at the back
a whatnot with terra-cotta and majolica ornaments.--
Against the back wall of the inner room a sofa, with a
table, and one or two chairs.Over the sofa hangs the
portrait of a handsome elderly man in a General's uniform.
Over the table a hanging lamp, with an opal glass shade.--A
number of bouquets are arranged about the drawing-room, in
vases and glasses.Others lie upon the tables.The floors
in both rooms are covered with thick carpets.--Morning light.
The sun shines in through the glass door.

MISS JULIANA TESMAN, with her bonnet on a carrying a parasol,
comes in from the hall, followed by BERTA, who carries a
bouquet wrapped in paper.MISS TESMAN is a comely and pleasant-
looking lady of about sixty-five.She is nicely but simply
dressed in a grey walking-costume.BERTA is a middle-aged
woman of plain and rather countrified appearance.


MISS TESMAN.

[Stops close to the door, listens, and says softly:] Upon my word, I
don't believe they are stirring yet!


BERTA.

[Also softly.] I told you so, Miss. Remember how late the steamboat got
in last night. And then, when they got home!--good Lord, what a lot the
young mistress had to unpack before she could get to bed.


MISS TESMAN.

Well well--let them have their sleep out. But let us see that they get a
good breath of the fresh morning air when they do appear.

[She goes to the glass door and throws it open.


BERTA.

[Beside the table, at a loss what to do with the bouquet in her hand.]
I declare there isn't a bit of room left. I think I'll put it down here,
Miss. [She places it on the piano.


MISS TESMAN.

So you've got a new mistress now, my dear Berta. Heaven knows it was a
wrench to me to part with you.


BERTA.

[On the point of weeping.] And do you think it wasn't hard for me, too,
Miss? After all the blessed years I've been with you and Miss Rina.(1)


MISS TESMAN.

We must make the best of it, Berta. There was nothing else to be done.
George can't do without you, you see-he absolutely can't. He has had you
to look after him ever since he was a little boy.


BERTA.

Ah but, Miss Julia, I can't help thinking of Miss Rina lying helpless
at home there, poor thing. And with only that new girl too! She'll never
learn to take proper care of an invalid.


MISS TESMAN.

Oh, I shall manage to train her. And of course, you know, I shall take
most of it upon myself. You needn't be uneasy about my poor sister, my
dear Berta.


BERTA.

Well, but there's another thing, Miss. I'm so mortally afraid I shan't
be able to suit the young mistress.


MISS TESMAN.

Oh well--just at first there may be one or two things--


BERTA.

Most like she'll be terrible grand in her ways.


MISS TESMAN.

Well, you can't wonder at that--General Gabler's daughter! Think of
the sort of life she was accustomed to in her father's time. Don't you
remember how we used to see her riding down the road along with the
General? In that long black habit--and with feathers in her hat?


BERTA.

Yes, indeed--I remember well enough!--But, good Lord, I should never
have dreamt in those days that she and Master George would make a match
of it.


MISS TESMAN.

Nor I.--But by-the-bye, Berta--while I think of it: in future you
mustn't say Master George. You must say Dr. Tesman.


BERTA.

Yes, the young mistress spoke of that too--last night--the moment they
set foot in the house. Is it true then, Miss?


MISS TESMAN.

Yes, indeed it is. Only think, Berta--some foreign university has made
him a doctor--while he has been abroad, you understand. I hadn't heard a
word about it, until he told me himself upon the pier.


BERTA.

Well well, he's clever enough for anything, he is. But I didn't think
he'd have gone in for doctoring people.


MISS TESMAN.

No no, it's not that sort of doctor he is. [Nods significantly.] But
let me tell you, we may have to call him something still grander before
long.


BERTA.

You don't say so! What can that be, Miss?


MISS TESMAN.

[Smiling.] H'm--wouldn't you like to know! [With emotion.] Ah, dear
dear--if my poor brother could only look up from his grave now, and
see what his little boy has grown into! [Looks around.] But bless me,
Berta--why have you done this? Taken the chintz covers off all the
furniture.


BERTA.

The mistress told me to. She can't abide covers on the chairs, she says.


MISS TESMAN.

Are they going to make this their everyday sitting-room then?


BERTA.

Yes, that's what I understood--from the mistress. Master George--the
doctor--he said nothing.