SCENE I (Music Master, Dancing Master, Musicians, and Dancers)

(The play opens with a great assembly of instruments, and in the
middle of the stage is a pupil of the Music Master seated at a
table composing a melody which Monsieur Jourdain has ordered for a
serenade.)

MUSIC MASTER: (To Musicians) Come, come into this room, sit there
and wait until he comes.

DANCING MASTER: (To dancers) And you too, on this side.

MUSIC MASTER: (To Pupil) Is it done?

PUPIL: Yes.

MUSIC MASTER: Let's see... This is good.

DANCING MASTER: Is it something new?

MUSIC MASTER: Yes, it's a melody for a serenade that I set him to
composing here, while waiting for our man to awake.

DANCING MASTER: May I see it?

MUSIC MASTER: You'll hear it, with the dialogue, when he comes.  He
won't be long.

DANCING MASTER: Our work, yours and mine, is not trivial at
present.

MUSIC MASTER: This is true. We've found here such a man as we both
need. This is a nice source of income for us--this Monsieur
Jourdain, with the visions of nobility and gallantry that he has
gotten into his head. You and I should hope that everyone resembled
him.

DANCING MASTER: Not entirely; I could wish that he understood
better the things that we give him.

MUSIC MASTER: It's true that he understands them poorly, but he
pays well, and that's what our art needs now more than anything
else.

DANCING MASTER: As for me, I admit, I feed a little on glory.
Applause touches me; and I hold that, in all the fine arts, it is
painful to produce for dolts, to endure the barbarous opinions of a
fool about my choreography. It is a pleasure, don't tell me
otherwise, to work for people who can appreciate the fine points of
an art, who know how to give a sweet reception to the beauties of a
work and, by pleasurable approbations, gratify us for our labor.
Yes, the most agreeable recompense we can receive for the things we
do is to see them recognized and flattered by an applause that
honors us. There is nothing, in my opinion, that pays us better for
all our fatigue; and it is an exquisite delight to receive the
praises of the well-informed.

MUSIC MASTER: I agree, and I enjoy them as you do. There is surely
nothing more agreeable than the applause you speak of; but that
incense does not provide a living. Pure praises do not provide a
comfortable existence; it is necessary to add something solid, and
the best way to praise is to praise with cash-in-hand.  He's a man,
it's true, whose insight is very slight, who talks nonsense about
everything and applauds only for the wrong reasons but his money
makes up for his judgments. He has discernment in his purse. His
praises are in cash, and this ignorant bourgeois is worth more to
us, as you see, than the educated nobleman who introduced us here.

DANCING MASTER: There is some truth in what you say; but I find
that you lean a little too heavily on money; and material interest
is something so base that a man of good taste should never show an
attachment to it.

MUSIC MASTER: You are ready enough to receive the money our man
gives you.

DANCING MASTER: Assuredly; but I don't place all my happiness in
it, and I could wish that together with his fortune he had some
good taste in things.

MUSIC MASTER: I could wish it too, that's what both of us are
working for as much as we can.  But, in any case, he gives us the
means to make ourselves known in the world; and he will pay others
if they will praise him.

DANCING MASTER: Here he comes.

SCENE II (Monsieur Jourdain, Two Lackeys, Music Master, Dancing
Master, Pupil, Musicians, and Dancers)

MONSIEUR JOURDAIN: Well gentlemen? What's this? Are you going to
show me your little skit?

DANCING MASTER: How? What little skit?

MONSIEUR JOURDAIN: Well, the... What-do-you-call it? Your
prologue or dialogue of songs and dances.

DANCING MASTER: Ha, ha!

MUSIC MASTER: You find us ready for you.

MONSIEUR JOURDAIN: I kept you waiting a little, but it's because
I'm having myself dressed today like the people of quality, and my
tailor sent me some silk stockings that I thought I would never get
on.

MUSIC MASTER: We are here only to wait upon your leisure.

MONSIEUR JOURDAIN: I want you both to stay until they have brought
me my suit, so that you may see me.

DANCING MASTER: Whatever you would like.