SCENE I.—ARGAN (_sitting at a table, adding up his apothecary’s
bill with counters_).


ARG. Three and two make five, and five make ten, and ten make twenty.
“Item, on the 24th, a small, insinuative clyster, preparative and
gentle, to soften, moisten, and refresh the bowels of Mr. Argan.” What
I like about Mr. Fleurant, my apothecary, is that his bills are always
civil. “The bowels of Mr. Argan.” All the same, Mr. Fleurant, it is
not enough to be civil, you must also be reasonable, and not plunder
sick people. Thirty sous for a clyster! I have already told you, with
all due respect to you, that elsewhere you have only charged me twenty
sous; and twenty sous, in the language of apothecaries, means only ten
sous. Here they are, these ten sous. “Item, on the said day, a good
detergent clyster, compounded of double catholicon rhubarb, honey of
roses, and other ingredients, according to the prescription, to scour,
work, and clear out the bowels of Mr. Argan, thirty sous.” With your
leave, ten sous. “Item, on the said day, in the evening, a julep,
hepatic, soporiferous, and somniferous, intended to promote the sleep
of Mr. Argan, thirty-five sous.” I do not complain of that, for it
made me sleep very well. Ten, fifteen, sixteen, and seventeen sous six
deniers. “Item, on the 25th, a good purgative and corroborative
mixture, composed of fresh cassia with Levantine senna and other
ingredients, according to the prescription of Mr. Purgon, to expel Mr.
Argan’s bile, four francs.” You are joking, Mr. Fleurant; you must
learn to be reasonable with patients; Mr. Purgon never ordered you to
put four francs. Tut! put three francs, if you please. Twenty; thirty
sous.[1] “Item, on the said day, a dose, anodyne and astringent, to
make Mr. Argan sleep, thirty sous.” Ten sous, Mr. Fleurant. “Item, on
the 26th, a carminative clyster to cure the flatulence of Mr. Argan,
thirty sous.” “Item, the clyster repeated in the evening, as above,
thirty sous.” Ten sous, Mr. Fleurant. “Item, on the 27th, a good
mixture composed for the purpose of driving out the bad humours of Mr.
Argan, three francs.” Good; twenty and thirty sous; I am glad that
you are reasonable. “Item, on the 28th, a dose of clarified and
edulcorated whey, to soften, lenify, temper, and refresh the blood of
Mr. Argan, twenty sous.” Good; ten sous. “Item, a potion, cordial and
preservative, composed of twelve grains of bezoar, syrup of citrons
and pomegranates, and other ingredients, according to the prescription,
five francs.” Ah! Mr. Fleurant, gently, if you please; if you go on
like that, no one will wish to be unwell. Be satisfied with four
francs. Twenty, forty sous. Three and two are five, and five are ten,
and ten are twenty. Sixty-three francs four sous six deniers. So that
during this month I have taken one, two, three, four, five, six,
seven, eight mixtures, and one, two, three, four, five, six, seven,
eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve clysters; and last month there were
twelve mixtures and twenty clysters. I am not astonished, therefore,
that I am not so well this month as last. I shall speak to Mr. Purgon
about it, so that he may set the matter right. Come, let all this be
taken away. (_He sees that no one comes, and that he is alone._)
Nobody. It’s no use, I am always left alone; there’s no way of keeping
them here. (_He rings a hand-bell._) They don’t hear, and my bell
doesn’t make enough noise. (_He rings again._) No one. (_He rings
again._) Toinette! (_He rings again._) It’s just as if I didn’t ring
at all. You hussy! you jade! (_He rings again._) Confound it all! (_He
rings and shouts._) Deuce take you, you wretch!


SCENE II.—ARGAN, TOINETTE.

TOI. Coming, coming.

ARG. Ah! you jade, you wretch!

TOI. (_pretending to have knocked her head_). Bother your impatience!
You hurry me so much that I have knocked my head against the
window-shutter.

ARG. (_angry_). You vixen!

TOI. (_interrupting_ ARGAN). Oh!

ARG. There is....

TOI. Oh!

ARG. For the last hour I....

TOI. Oh!

ARG. You have left me....

TOI. Oh!

ARG. Be silent! you baggage, and let me scold you.

TOI. Well! that’s too bad after what I have done to myself.

ARG. You make me bawl till my throat is sore, you jade!

TOI. And you, you made me break my head open; one is just as bad as
the other; so, with your leave, we are quits.

ARG. What! you hussy....

TOI. If you go on scolding me, I shall cry.

ARG. To leave me, you....

TOI. (_again interrupting_ ARGAN.) Oh!

ARG. You would....

TOI. (_still interrupting him_). Oh!

ARG. What! shall I have also to give up the pleasure of scolding her?

TOI. Well, scold as much as you please; do as you like.

ARG. You prevent me, you hussy, by interrupting me every moment.

TOI. If you have the pleasure of scolding, I surely can have that of
crying. Let every one have his fancy; ’tis but right. Oh! oh!

ARG. I must give it up, I suppose. Take this away, take this away, you
jade. Be careful to have some broth ready, for the other that I am to
take soon.

TOI. This Mr. Fleurant and Mr. Purgon amuse themselves finely with
your body. They have a rare milch-cow in you, I must say; and I should
like them to tell me what disease it is you have for them to physic
you so.

ARG. Hold your tongue, simpleton; it is not for you to control the
decrees of the faculty. Ask my daughter Angélique to come to me. I
have something to tell her.

TOI. Here she is, coming of her own accord; she must have guessed your
thoughts.