[MADHAV'S House]

MADHAV.  What a state I am in!  Before he came, nothing mattered;
I felt so free.  But now that he has come, goodness knows from
where, my heart is filled with his dear self, and my home will be
no home to me when he leaves.  Doctor, do you think he--

PHYSICIAN.  If there's life in his fate, then he will live long.
But what the medical scriptures say, it seems--

MADHAV.  Great heavens, what?

PHYSICIAN.  The scriptures have it: "Bile or palsey, cold or gout
spring all alike."

MADHAV.  Oh, get along, don't fling your scriptures at me; you
only make me more anxious; tell me what I can do.

PHYSICIAN.  [Taking snuff] The patient needs the most scrupulous
care.

MADHAV.  That's true; but tell me how.

PHYSICIAN.  I have already mentioned, on no account must he be
let out of doors.

MADHAV Poor child, it is very hard to keep him indoors all day
long.

PHYSICIAN.  What else can you do?  The autumn sun and the damp
are both very bad for the little fellow--for the scriptures have
it:

  "In wheezing, swoon or in nervous fret,
    In jaundice or leaden eyes--"


MADHAV.  Never mind the scriptures, please.  Eh, then we must
shut the poor thing up.  Is there no other method?

PHYSICIAN.  None at all: for, "In the wind and in the sun--"

MADHAV.  What will your "in this and in that" do for me now?  Why
don't you let them alone and come straight to the point?  What's
to be done then?  Your system is very, very hard for the poor
boy; and he is so quiet too with all his pain and sickness.  It
tears my heart to see him wince, as he takes your medicine.

PHYSICIAN.  The more he winces, the surer is the effect.  That's
why the sage Chyabana observes: "In medicine as in good advices,
the least palatable ones are the truest."  Ah, well!  I must
be trotting now.  [Exit]

[GAFFER enters]

MADHAV.  Well, I'm jiggered, there's Gaffer now.

GAFFER.  Why, why, I won't bite you.

MADHAV.  No, but you are a devil to send children off their
heads.

GAFFER.  But you aren't a child, and you've no child in the
house; why worry then?

MADHAV.  Oh, but I have brought a child into the house.

GAFFER.  Indeed, how so?

MADHAV.  You remember how my wife was dying to adopt a child?

GAFFER.  Yes, but that's an old story; you didn't like the idea.

MADHAV.  You know, brother, how hard all this getting money in
has been.  That somebody else's child would sail in and waste all
this money earned with so much trouble--Oh, I hated the idea.
But this boy clings to my heart in such a queer sort of way--

GAFFER.  So that's the trouble!  and your money goes all for him
and feels jolly lucky it does go at all.

MADHAV.  Formerly, earning was a sort of passion with me; I
simply couldn't help working for money.  Now, I make money and as
I know it is all for this dear boy, earning becomes a joy to me.

GAFFER.  Ah, well, and where did you pick him up?

MADHAV.  He is the son of a man who was a brother to my wife by
village ties.  He has had no mother since infancy; and now the
other day he lost his father as well.

GAFFER.  Poor thing: and so he needs me all the more.

MADHAV.  The doctor says all the organs of his little body are at
loggerheads with each other, and there isn't much hope for his
life.  There is only one way to save him and that is to keep him
out of this autumn wind and sun.  But you are such a terror!
What with this game of yours at your age, too, to get children
out of doors!

GAFFER.  God bless my soul!  So I'm already as bad as autumn wind
and sun, eh!  But, friend, I know something, too, of the game of
keeping them indoors.  When my day's work is over I am coming in
to make friends with this child of yours.  [Exit]

[AMAL enters]

AMAL.  Uncle, I say, Uncle!

MADHAV.  Hullo!  Is that you, Amal?

AMAL.  Mayn't I be out of the courtyard at all?

MADHAV.  No, my dear, no.

AMAL.  See, there where Auntie grinds lentils in the quirn, the
squirrel is sitting with his tail up and with his wee hands he's
picking up the broken grains of lentils and crunching them.
Can't I run up there?

MADHAV.  No, my darling, no.

AMAL.  Wish I were a squirrel!--it would be lovely.  Uncle, why
won't you let me go about?

MADHAV.  Doctor says it's bad for you to be out.

AMAL.  How can the doctor know?

MADHAV.  What a thing to say!  The doctor can't know and he reads
such huge books!

AMAL.  Does his book-learning tell him everything?

MADHAV.  Of course, don't you know!