NEVER had I seen a year going out, or going on, under quieter
circumstances.  Eighteen hundred and fifty-nine had but another day to
live, and truly its end was Peace on that sea-shore that morning.

So settled and orderly was everything seaward, in the bright light of the
sun and under the transparent shadows of the clouds, that it was hard to
imagine the bay otherwise, for years past or to come, than it was that
very day.  The Tug-steamer lying a little off the shore, the Lighter
lying still nearer to the shore, the boat alongside the Lighter, the
regularly-turning windlass aboard the Lighter, the methodical figures at
work, all slowly and regularly heaving up and down with the breathing of
the sea, all seemed as much a part of the nature of the place as the tide
itself.  The tide was on the flow, and had been for some two hours and a
half; there was a slight obstruction in the sea within a few yards of my
feet: as if the stump of a tree, with earth enough about it to keep it
from lying horizontally on the water, had slipped a little from the
land—and as I stood upon the beach and observed it dimpling the light
swell that was coming in, I cast a stone over it.

So orderly, so quiet, so regular—the rising and falling of the
Tug-steamer, the Lighter, and the boat—the turning of the windlass—the
coming in of the tide—that I myself seemed, to my own thinking, anything
but new to the spot.  Yet, I had never seen it in my life, a minute
before, and had traversed two hundred miles to get at it.  That very
morning I had come bowling down, and struggling up, hill-country roads;
looking back at snowy summits; meeting courteous peasants well to do,
driving fat pigs and cattle to market: noting the neat and thrifty
dwellings, with their unusual quantity of clean white linen, drying on
the bushes; having windy weather suggested by every cotter’s little rick,
with its thatch straw-ridged and extra straw-ridged into overlapping
compartments like the back of a rhinoceros.  Had I not given a lift of
fourteen miles to the Coast-guardsman (kit and all), who was coming to
his spell of duty there, and had we not just now parted company?  So it
was; but the journey seemed to glide down into the placid sea, with other
chafe and trouble, and for the moment nothing was so calmly and
monotonously real under the sunlight as the gentle rising and falling of
the water with its freight, the regular turning of the windlass aboard
the Lighter, and the slight obstruction so very near my feet.

O reader, haply turning this page by the fireside at Home, and hearing
the night wind rumble in the chimney, that slight obstruction was the
uppermost fragment of the Wreck of the Royal Charter, Australian trader
and passenger ship, Homeward bound, that struck here on the terrible
morning of the twenty-sixth of this October, broke into three parts, went
down with her treasure of at least five hundred human lives, and has
never stirred since!