Let us give the name of hypothesis to anything that may be proposed
to our belief; and just as the electricians speak of live and dead
wires, let us speak of any hypothesis as either live or dead.  A
live hypothesis is one which appeals as a real possibility to him to
whom it is proposed.  If I ask you to believe in the Mahdi, the notion
makes no electric connection with your nature,--it refuses to
scintillate with any credibility at all.  As an hypothesis it is
completely dead.  To an Arab, however (even if he be not one of the
Mahdi's followers), the hypothesis is among the mind's possibilities:
it is alive.  This shows that deadness and liveness in an hypothesis
are not intrinsic properties, but relations to the {3} individual
thinker.  They are measured by his willingness to act.  The maximum of
liveness in an hypothesis means willingness to act irrevocably.
Practically, that means belief; but there is some believing tendency
wherever there is willingness to act at all.

Next, let us call the decision between two hypotheses an option.
Options may be of several kinds.  They may be--1, living or dead;
2, forced or avoidable; 3, momentous or trivial; and for our
purposes we may call an option a genuine option when it is of the
forced, living, and momentous kind.

1.  A living option is one in which both hypotheses are live ones.  If
I say to you: "Be a theosophist or be a Mohammedan," it is probably a
dead option, because for you neither hypothesis is likely to be alive.
But if I say: "Be an agnostic or be a Christian," it is otherwise:
trained as you are, each hypothesis makes some appeal, however small,
to your belief.

2.  Next, if I say to you: "Choose between going out with your umbrella
or without it," I do not offer you a genuine option, for it is not
forced.  You can easily avoid it by not going out at all.  Similarly,
if I say, "Either love me or hate me," "Either call my theory true or
call it false," your option is avoidable.  You may remain indifferent
to me, neither loving nor hating, and you may decline to offer any
judgment as to my theory.  But if I say, "Either accept this truth or
go without it," I put on you a forced option, for there is no standing
place outside of the alternative.  Every dilemma based on a complete
logical disjunction, with no possibility of not choosing, is an option
of this forced kind.