I HAVE just touched my dog. He was rolling on the grass, with pleasure
in every muscle and limb. I wanted to catch a picture of him in my
fingers, and I touched him as lightly as I would cobwebs; but lo, his
fat body revolved, stiffened and solidified into an upright position,
and his tongue gave my hand a lick! He pressed close to me, as if he
were fain to crowd himself into my hand. He loved it with his tail, with
his paw, with his tongue. If he could speak, I believe he would say with
me that paradise is attained by touch; for in touch is all love and
intelligence.

This small incident started me on a chat about hands, and if my chat is
fortunate I have to thank my dog-star. In any case, it is pleasant to
have something to talk about that no one else has monopolized; it is
like making a new path in the trackless woods, blazing the trail where
no foot has pressed before. I am glad to take you by the hand and lead
you along an untrodden way into a world where the hand is supreme. But
at the very outset we encounter a difficulty. You are so accustomed to
light, I fear you will stumble when I try to guide you through the land
of darkness and silence. The blind are not supposed to be the best of
guides. Still, though I cannot warrant not to lose you, I promise that
you shall not be led into fire or water, or fall into a deep pit. If
you will follow me patiently, you will find that "there's a sound so
fine, nothing lives 'twixt it and silence," and that there is more meant
in things than meets the eye.

My hand is to me what your hearing and sight together are to you. In
large measure we travel the same highways, read the same books, speak
the same language, yet our experiences are different. All my comings and
goings turn on the hand as on a pivot. It is the hand that binds me to
the world of men and women. The hand is my feeler with which I reach
through isolation and darkness and seize every pleasure, every activity
that my fingers encounter. With the dropping of a little word from
another's hand into mine, a slight flutter of the fingers, began the
intelligence, the joy, the fullness of my life. Like Job, I feel as if
a hand had made me, fashioned me together round about and moulded my
very soul.

In all my experiences and thoughts I am conscious of a hand. Whatever
moves me, whatever thrills me, is as a hand that touches me in the dark,
and that touch is my reality. You might as well say that a sight which
makes you glad, or a blow which brings the stinging tears to your eyes,
is unreal as to say that those impressions are unreal which I have
accumulated by means of touch. The delicate tremble of a butterfly's
wings in my hand, the soft petals of violets curling in the cool folds
of their leaves or lifting sweetly out of the meadow-grass, the clear,
firm outline of face and limb, the smooth arch of a horse's neck and
the velvety touch of his nose--all these, and a thousand resultant
combinations, which take shape in my mind, constitute my world.