At the foot of the lofty granitic range which, in the early age of our
planet, resisted the irruption of the waters on the formation of the
Caribbean Gulf, extends a vast and boundless plain. When the traveller
turns from the Alpine valleys of Caracas, and the island-studded lake of
Tacarigua[1], whose waters reflect the forms of the neighbouring
bananas,—when he leaves the fields verdant with the light and tender
green of the Tahitian sugar-cane, or the sombre shade of the cacoa
groves,—his eye rests in the south on Steppes, whose seeming elevations
disappear in the distant horizon.

From the rich luxuriance of organic life the astonished traveller
suddenly finds himself on the dreary margin of a treeless waste. Nor
hill, nor cliff rears its head, like an island in the ocean, above the
boundless plain: only here and there broken strata of floetz, extending
over a surface of two hundred square miles, (more than three thousand
English square miles[C],) appear sensibly higher than the surrounding
district. The natives term them _banks_[2], as if the spirit of language
would convey some record of that ancient condition of the world, when
these elevations formed the shoals, and the Steppes themselves the
bottom, of some vast inland sea.

Even now, illusion often recalls, in the obscurity of night, these
images of a former age. For when the guiding constellations illumine the
margin of the plain with their rapidly rising and setting beams, or when
their flickering forms are reflected in the lower stratum of undulating
vapour, a shoreless ocean seems spread before us[3]. Like a limitless
expanse of waters, the Steppe fills the mind with a sense of the
infinite, and the soul, freed from the sensuous impressions of space,
expands with spiritual emotions of a higher order. But the aspect of the
ocean, its bright surface diversified with rippling or gently swelling
waves, is productive of pleasurable sensations,—while the Steppe lies
stretched before us, cold and monotonous, like the naked stony crust of
some desolate planet[4].

In all latitudes nature presents the phenomenon of these vast plains,
and each has some peculiar character or physiognomy, determined by
diversity of soil and climate, and by elevation above the level of the
sea.