There are few lands upon the whole globe so imperfectly known to
geographic science as the one which we shall try to describe in this
little work. The geographic concept of the Ukraine does not exist in
the geography of today. Even the name has been almost forgotten in
Europe in the course of the last century and a half. Only occasionally
on some maps of Eastern Europe the name “Ukraine” shows timidly along
the middle of the Dnieper. And yet it is an old name of the country,
originating in the 11th Century, generally known thruout Europe from
the 16th to the end of the 18th century, and then, after the abrogation
of the autonomy of the second Ukrainian state, gradually fallen into
oblivion. The Russian Government has determined to erase the old name
of the land and the nation from the map of Europe. Little Russia, West
Russia, South Russia, New Russia, were officially introduced in place
of the old name Ukraine, the Austrian part of the Ukraine receiving the
name of East Galicia. The people were named Little Russians, South
Russians, Ruthenians, and all remembrance of the old name seemed to
have been blotted out. But, in the speech of the people and in the
magnificent unwritten popular literature of the nation, the name of the
land could not be destroyed, and, with the unexpected rise of Ukrainian
literature, culture, and a feeling of national political independence
in the 19th Century, the name Ukraine came into its own again. Today
there is not an intelligent patriotic Ukrainian who would use another
name for his country and nation than Ukraine and Ukrainian, and,
slowly, these designations are penetrating foreign lands as well.

The Ukraine is the land in which the Ukrainian nation dwells—a great
solid national territory embracing all the southern part of Russia in
Europe, besides East Galicia, Northwest Bukowina and Northeast Hungary.

This district is a definite geographic unit. A discussion of its exact
boundaries shall be reserved for the anthropogeographical part of this
book.

A division of Europe into natural regions almost invariably stops at
Eastern Europe. While all the other portions of our globe have long
been the object of the most detailed classification, Eastern Europe
remains, as before, an undivided whole. To be sure, there have been
many attempts at classification, but they are all based upon a
non-geographical point of view. Only the Baltic provinces and Poland
are, in their present political extent, regarded as possible geographic
units.