Entering the park from the northeast, you are on a road traversing the
pineland-and-hammock “ridge.” This elevated part of the South Florida
limestone bedrock, which at the park entrance is about 6 feet above sea
level, is the driest zone in the park. Pine trees, which will grow only
on ground that remains above water most of the year, thrive on this
rockland.

There is another condition essential to the survival of the pine forest
in this region—fire. We usually think of fire as the enemy of forest
vegetation; but that is not true here. The pines that grow in this part
of Florida have a natural resistance to fire. Their thick, corky bark
insulates their trunks from the flames. And strangely enough the fire
actually seems to help with pine reproduction; it destroys competing
vegetation and exposes the mineral soil seedlings need. If there has
been a good cone crop, you will find an abundant growth of pine
seedlings after a fire in the pinelands.

What would happen if the pinelands were protected from fire? Examine a
pine forest where there have been no recent fires. You will note that
there are many small hardwood (broadleaved) trees growing in the shade
of the pines. These hardwoods would eventually shade out the
light-demanding pine seedlings, and take over as the old pines died off.
But under normal conditions, lightning-caused fires sweep at fairly
frequent intervals through the pineland. Since the hardwoods have little
resistance to fire, they are pruned back.

Before this century, fires burned vast areas. The only barriers were
natural waterways—sloughs, lakes and ponds, and estuaries—which retained
some water during the rainless season when the rest of the glades and
pinelands dried up. Old-timers say that sometimes a fire would travel
all the way from Lake Okeechobee to the coastal prairie of Cape Sable
(_see_ page 2). In the pine forest, any area bypassed by these fires for
a lengthy period developed into a junglelike island of hardwoods. We
call such stands “hammocks,” whether they develop in the pine forest or
in the open glades. On the limestone ridge, the hammocks support a
community of plants and animals strikingly different from the
surrounding pine forests.