This agreement in the number of species in each family compared to
the whole number of phenogamous species in the Floras of France
and Germany, would not by any means exist if the German species
which are missing in France were not replaced there by other types
belonging to the same families. Those who are fond of imagining
gradual transformations of species, and suppose the different kinds
of parrots proper to two islands not far removed from each other to
present examples of such a change, will be inclined to attribute the
remarkable similarity between the two columns of figures which have
just been given, to a migration of species, which, having been the same
at first, have been altered gradually by the long-continued action
of climatic causes during thousands of years, so that their identity
being lost they appear to replace each other. But why is it that our
common heather (Calluna vulgaris), why is it that our oaks have never
advanced to the eastward of the Ural Mountains, and so passed from
Europe to Northern Asia? Why is there no species of the genus Rosa in
the Southern Hemisphere, and why are there scarcely any Calceolarias
in the Northern Hemisphere? The necessary conditions of temperature
are insufficient to explain this. Thermic relations alone cannot, any
more than the hypothesis of migrations of plants radiating from certain
central points, explain the present distribution of fixed organic
forms. Thermic relations are hardly sufficient to explain the limits
beyond which individual species do not pass, either in latitude towards
the pole at the level of the sea, or in vertical elevation towards the
summits of mountains. The cycle of vegetation in each species, however
different its duration may be, requires, in order to be successfully
passed through, a certain minimum of temperature. (Playfair, in the
Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, vol. v. 1805, p. 202;
Humboldt, on the sum of the degrees of temperature required for the
cycle of vegetation in the Cerealia, in Mem. sur les lignes isothermes,
p. 96; Boussingault, Economie rurale, T, ii. p. 659, 663, and 667;
Alphonse Decandolle sur les causes qui limitent les espèces végétales,
1847, p. 8.) But all the conditions necessary for the existence of a
plant, either as diffused naturally or by cultivation,--conditions
of latitude or minimum distance from the pole, and of elevation or
maximum height above the level of the sea,--are farther complicated by
the difficulty of determining the commencement of the thermic cycle
of vegetation, and by the influence which the unequal distribution of
the same quantity of heat into groups of successive days and nights
exercises on the excitability, the progressive development, and the
whole vital process; to all this must be farther added hygrometric
influences and those of atmospheric electricity.
My investigations respecting the numerical laws of the distribution
of forms may possibly be applied at some future day with advantage to
the different classes of Rotiferæ in the animal creation. The rich
collections at the Museum d’Histoire Naturelle in the Jardin des
Plantes at Paris, already contained, in 1820, (according to approximate
estimations) above 56000 phænogamous and cryptogamous plants in
herbariums, 44000 insects (a number doubtless too small, though given
me by Latreille), 2500 species of fish, 700 reptiles, 4000 birds, and
500 mammalia. Europe has about 80 species of indigenous mammalia, 400
birds, and 30 reptiles. In the Northern temperate zone, therefore, the
species of birds are five times more numerous than those of mammalia,
as there are in Europe five times as many Compositæ as there are
Amentaceæ and Coniferæ, and five times as many Leguminosæ as there
are Orchideæ and Euphorbiaceæ. In the southern hemisphere the ratio
of mammalia is in tolerably striking agreement, being as 1 to 4·3.
Birds, and still more reptiles, increase in the number of species in
approaching the torrid zone more than the mammalia. Cuvier’s researches
might lead us to believe that the proportion was different in the
earlier state of things, and that many more mammalia had perished by
revolutions of Nature than birds. Latreille has shewn what groups
of insects increase towards the pole, and what towards the equator.
Illiger has given the countries of 3800 species of birds according to
the quarters of the globe: it would have been much more instructive if
the same thing had been done according to zones. We should find little
difficulty in comprehending how on a given space of the earth’s surface
the individuals of a class of plants or animals limit each other’s
numbers, or how, after long continued contest and many fluctuations
caused by the requirements of nourishment and mode of life, a state
of equilibrium should be at last established; but the causes which
have limited not the number of individuals of a form, but the forms
themselves, in a particular space, and founded their typical diversity,
are placed beneath the impenetrable veil which still conceals from
our eyes all that relates to the manner of the first creation and
commencement of organic beings.