The Roman Empire, at the period of its greatest expansion, comprised the
regions of the earth most distinguished by a happy combination of
physical advantages. The provinces bordering on the principal and the
secondary basins of the Mediterranean enjoyed a healthfulness and an
equability of climate, a fertility of soil, a variety of vegetable and
mineral products, and natural facilities for the transportation and
distribution of exchangeable commodities, which have not been possessed
in an equal degree by any territory of like extent in the Old World or
the New. The abundance of the land and of the waters adequately supplied
every material want, ministered liberally to every sensuous enjoyment.
Gold and silver, indeed, were not found in the profusion which has
proved so baneful to the industry of lands richer in veins of the
precious metals; but mines and river beds yielded them in the spare
measure most favorable to stability of value in the medium of exchange,
and, consequently, to the regularity of commercial transactions. The
ornaments of the barbaric pride of the East, the pearl, the ruby, the
sapphire, and the diamond--though not unknown to the luxury of a people
whose conquests and whose wealth commanded whatever the habitable world
could contribute to augment the material splendor of their social
life--were scarcely native to the territory of the empire; but the
comparative rarity of these gems in Europe, at somewhat earlier periods,
was, perhaps, the very circumstance that led the cunning artists of
classic antiquity to enrich softer stones with engravings, which invest
the common onyx and carnelian with a worth surpassing, in cultivated
eyes, the lustre of the most brilliant oriental jewels.

Of these manifold blessings the temperature of the air, the distribution
of the rains, the relative disposition of land and water, the plenty of
the sea, the composition of the soil, and the raw material of some of
the arts, were wholly gratuitous gifts. Yet the spontaneous nature of
Europe, of Western Asia, of Libya, neither fed nor clothed the civilized
inhabitants of those provinces. Every loaf was eaten in the sweat of the
brow. All must be earned by toil. But toil was nowhere else rewarded by
so generous wages; for nowhere would a given amount of intelligent labor
produce so abundant, and, at the same time, so varied returns of the
good things of material existence. The luxuriant harvests of cereals
that waved on every field from the shores of the Rhine to the banks of
the Nile, the vines that festooned the hillsides of Syria, of Italy, and
of Greece, the olives of Spain, the fruits of the gardens of the
Hesperides, the domestic quadrupeds and fowls known in ancient rural
husbandry--all these were original products of foreign climes,
naturalized in new homes, and gradually ennobled by the art of man,
while centuries of persevering labor were expelling the wild vegetation,
and fitting the earth for the production of more generous growths.