As the reader knows, the Poles are the two extremities of the axis
round which the Earth revolves. It is to the North Pole, and the
regions surrounding it, that the following pages will be devoted.

The inhabitants of Western Europe, and more particularly those of the
British Isles, have a peculiar interest in the North Polar Regions.
Deriving their wealth and importance from their commercial enterprise,
and that commercial enterprise leading their ships and seamen into the
furthest seas, they have necessarily a vital concern in the discovery
of the shortest possible route from that side of the Earth which they
inhabit to the other, or eastern side; and this, more particularly,
because the East is rich in natural productions which are of high value
to the peoples of the West.

Now a glance at the map will show the reader that the traders
of Western Europe--the British, the French, the Dutch, the
Scandinavians--are situated on the northern shores of the Atlantic
Ocean, and that, to reach the Pacific Ocean or the Indian, only
two routes are at present open. For instance, they may cross the
Atlantic to the American coast, and, keeping southward, strike through
Magellan’s stormy Strait or round the bleak promontory of Cape Horn
into the Pacific, and then, over some thousands of miles of water,
proceed to Australia or Hindustan or China; or they may keep along
the African coast to the Cape of Good Hope, its southernmost point,
and so stretch across the warm Tropical seas to India and the Eastern
Archipelago. A third, an _artificial_ route, has indeed of late
years been opened up; and ships, entering the Mediterranean, may pass
through the Suez Canal into the Red Sea. But this last-named route is
unsuitable for sailing-ships, and all three routes are laborious and
slow. How greatly the distance would be shortened were it possible
to navigate the Northern Seas, and, keeping along the north coast of
the American continent, to descend Behring’s Strait into the Pacific!
In other words, were that North-West Passage practicable, which, for
three centuries, our geographers and explorers so assiduously and
courageously toiled to discover! But a still shorter route would be
opened up, if we could follow a line drawn from the British Islands
straight across the North Pole to Behring’s Sea and the Aleutian
Archipelago. This line would not exceed 5000 miles in length, and would
bring Japan, China, and India within a very short voyage from Great
Britain. We should be able to reach Japan in three or four weeks, to
the obvious advantage of our extensive commerce.

Hitherto, however, all efforts to follow out this route, and to throw
open this great ocean-highway between Europe and Asia, have failed. Man
has been baffled by Nature; by ice, and frost, and winds, and climatic
influences. With heroic perseverance he has sought to gain the open
sea which, it is believed, surrounds the Pole, but a barrier of ice
has invariably arrested his progress. His researches have carried him
within about 500 miles of the coveted point; but he is as yet unable
to move a step beyond this furthest limit of geographical discovery.
Immediately around the North Pole, within a radius of eight to ten
degrees or more, according to locality, still lies an Unknown Region,
on the threshold of which Science stands expectant, eagerly looking
forward to the day when human skill and human courage shall penetrate
its solitudes and reveal its secrets.