Following the proper order of things, we have now arrived at the
culminating point of the wonders manifested to us by the operations of
Nature. And even at the very outset, we find spontaneously presented
to us an incomparable illustration of her mysterious powers: so
much so, in fact, that beyond it we feel ourselves bound to forbear
extending our enquiries, there being nothing to be found either equal
or analogous to an element in which Nature quite triumphs over herself,
and that, too, in such numberless ways. For what is there more unruly
than the sea, with its winds, its tornadoes, and its tempests? And yet
in what department of her works has Nature been more seconded by the
ingenuity of man, than in this, by his inventions of sails and of oars?
In addition to this, we are struck with the ineffable might displayed
by the Ocean’s tides, as they constantly ebb and flow, and so regulate
the currents of the sea as though they were the waters of one vast
river.

And yet all these forces, though acting in unison, and impelling in the
same direction, a single fish, and that of a very diminutive size—the
fish known as the “echeneïs”—possesses the power of counteracting.
Winds may blow and storms may rage, and yet the echeneïs controls their
fury, restrains their mighty force, and bids ships stand still in their
career; a result which no cables, no anchors, from their ponderousness
quite incapable of being weighed, could ever have produced! A fish
bridles the impetuous violence of the deep, and subdues the frantic
rage of the universe—and all this by no effort of its own, no act of
resistance on its part, no act at all, in fact, but that of adhering
to the bark! Trifling as this object would appear, it suffices to
counteract all these forces combined, and to forbid the ship to pass
onward in its way! Fleets, armed for war, pile up towers and bulwarks
on their decks, in order that, upon the deep even, men may fight from
behind ramparts as it were. But alas for human vanity!—when their
prows, beaked as they are with brass and with iron, and armed for
the onset, can thus be arrested and rivetted to the spot by a little
fish, no more than some half foot in length!
