The Hungarian Central Office for Ornithology was instituted in 1804, in
accordance with a scheme submitted to the Ministry of Agriculture by Mr.
Otto Herman, then a member of the Hungarian Parliament.

The rapid progress of economical affairs in the nineteenth century,
particularly in its second half, had a perceptible influence upon the
position occupied by the bird and insect fauna, a change which was felt
in agriculture, and led to the formation of a new branch of
science--ornithologia oeconomica.

The Hungarian Central Office for Ornithology took the new branch in
hand, after its transfer from the sphere of the Ministry of Public
Instruction to that of the Ministry of Agriculture, where M. de Darányi
assigned an important place to practical experimental methods as a
complement to strict science.

In the meantime Baron Hans von Berlepsch of Seebach developed his system
for the protection and propagation of the most useful birds, the main
points of which were the feeding and providing with nesting
opportunities of such birds. Thereby bird protection was diverted into a
rational direction, which met with hearty sympathy on the part of M. de
Darányi; consequently the Hungarian Central Office for Ornithology
included this branch of ornithology in the work it set itself to do.

The course followed by rational bird-protection in Hungary is as
follows. It starts with the idea that nature itself knows neither
useful nor noxious birds, but only necessary ones, which have developed
according to the laws of nature, and on the basis of their development
are performing in the world of nature the work which is appropriate to
their organism.

The manifold character of the work performed by birds is in harmony with
the variety of these organisms.

The question of the usefulness and noxiousness of birds during the whole
of the nineteenth century was treated only approximately, upon the
assertions of authorities. When, later on, Congresses began to embrace
the cause of bird-protection, and the question of the usefulness or
noxiousness of each species assumed a rôle of the first importance, it
turned out that there was no firm basis upon which to rely, in passing
judgment. Eminent ornithologists were often at variance with regard to
the usefulness or noxiousness of a particular species.

Where Nature is intact, the number of birds is automatically regulated
in accordance with the natural development of their surroundings.

The conceptions of “useful” and “noxious” are merely human ones; and man
can, by cultivation or the contrary, alter the normal conditions; and
may, consequently, modify the character and habits of birds also.
Agriculture on a large scale, modern forestry, the draining of
territory--all these things alter the fundamental conditions of animal
life, and in consequence of bird-life also; and if these modifications
in respect of birds are injurious to man, it is in the interests of man
to adapt them artificially for the benefit of birds; and if by
cultivation man deprives useful birds of their natural nesting
facilities, he ought to provide them with artificial ones. This is the
principle on which Baron von Berlepsch founded his system, which was
accepted and applied in Hungary, together with the modifications
required by special circumstances, or such as were introduced as the
result of experience.