There is no need to dwell on the well-known events that could be
mentioned under this heading. Seabird ornithologists are familiar
with the fact that the atmosphere is the medium of seabirds both when
searching the ocean for feeding areas and when on migration, and also
a violent enemy, as when particular storms cause occasional "wrecks"
of seabirds inland from coastlines. As a refinement of the former,
Manikowski of Poland suggests that seabirds respond to the passage of
weather systems, so that their distribution over the open ocean may
be constantly changing. Whereas some species may attempt to avoid the
stormy conditions of low-pressure areas (cyclonic conditions), others
more highly specialized for exploiting the aerodynamic properties of
wind over a moving water surface may possibly, instead, try to avoid
large high-pressure regions (anticyclonic conditions with little or
no wind). My student, Juan Guzman, is attempting to determine whether
this may be so; if it is, it might be possible, for example, to predict
some things about the distribution patterns and population structure of
southern hemisphere shearwaters while they are visiting the oceans of
the northern hemisphere during the nonbreeding season.

In comparison with the "wrecks" brought about by storms, which are of
short duration and not usually very serious, seabird ornithologists are
also familiar with relatively brief and localized disasters caused by
changes in the ocean itself. The best-known example is a slight change
in the boundary of an ocean current (or other shift in the position of
a distinctive water mass) that results in the failure of food fishes to
appear as they normally would, close to breeding sites of conspicuous
colonial seabirds, such as the periodic shift in the El Niño off the
west coast of South America. A scarcely studied refinement of this
type of event would be the effects of less-pronounced oceanic changes
that might reduce the planktonic food supply of nocturnally active,
burrow-nesting seabirds. In such instances, the effects might also be a
breeding failure for only one or two seasons; in all probability such
events occur, but whether they are as likely to be detected by us is
problematical. However, the populations of most seabirds are probably
already adapted to survive short-term crises of this type because,
having long adult life spans, reproductive adults that fail to raise
young one year may mostly live to succeed in doing so in the next or
succeeding year, when the oceanic "anomaly" has disappeared. What
constitutes an "anomaly" will be considered again shortly.

A third critical condition for seabirds may be local or widespread,
temporary or final, or some combination of these. A single local spill,
or outfall, of a chemical pollutant will be short term if we can take
steps to alleviate the consequences or stem the flow. Alternately, we
may consider it to be long term if we take the view that it is one
additional act of violence resulting from the "progress" of Industrial
Man, and that it is never going to shift into reverse gear. We may
say that the effect on seabird populations of spills of oil products
or chemical pollutants in coastal waters of a region will be a "final
solution" for any that become wholly extinct before the oil wells go
dry or the industries fail. On the other hand, the effect will have
been merely a perturbation of the population if the species survives
and outlives these activities. Recent upturns in populations of
peregrine falcons _(Falco peregrinus)_ and pelicans _(Pelecanus sp.)_
in certain places where environmental controls have been enacted give
us hope that crises of several years' duration can be withstood by
at least those species that once were common in relation to their
respective food sources or available safe breeding habitats. The really
critical features to document are the means whereby abandoned breeding
sites are reoccupied and the time it takes.